A commonly used definition of spatial disorientation (SD) in aeronautics is "an erroneous sense of one’s position and motion relative to the plane of the earth’s surface". 

SD has a wide range of situations and factors, but mainly it has been studied using reduced experimental contexts such as motion detection experimentation in isolation. 

Because there are many SD use-cases that are studied in isolation in a reduced manner, it is difficult to develop a generalized and fundamental understanding of the occurrence of SD and viable solutions. 

To investigate SD in a generalized manner, a two-part Human Activity Recognition (HAR) study consisting of an in-flight piloting use-case experiment and Machine Learning (ML)/Deep Learning (DL) model prediction was performed. The first part of the study was the creation of a generalized SD perception dataset using whole-body experimental motion detection methods in a naturalistic flight context; participant perceptual joystick response was measured during rotational or translational vestibular stimulation. 

The second part of the study consisted of HAR SD feature, model, and label comparison. 

Human movement science domain knowledge for joystick response derived feature selection was exploited, and time and/or frequency signal contributions for sequential and spatial model architectures were investigated. 

% ------------ Analysis : re-write NOW
% re-write : ok, it is the timesteps/time-delay  
% Human behavior was interpreted from DL model parameters.  

% re-write : we wanted to determine if questionnaire responses about physical disorientation correlated with motion detection responses
A potential HAR SD feature was investigated using statistical analysis, comparing measurement trends of physical disorientation with respect to the motion detection label; the simulator sickness questionnaire (SSQ) disorientation sub-scale was used to quantify physical disorientation. 




% ------------ Results: re-write AFTER doing results analysis ------------
The perceptual SD dataset was statistically proven to be representative of human motion detection behavior, demonstrating that the simulation environment was sufficient to generate a fidel SD context. DL modeling comparison analysis demonstrated that SD can be accurately predicted. 

(will change ***) Feature quantity (1. compare accuracy and ROC-AUC for all models/conditions for fea=0,1,3,all), 
model type (new** 1. compare accuracy and ROC-AUC for sequential (SVM, LSTM), spatial/parallel (CNN, LSTMCNN,), subspace, other), 
models from use-case data (1. compare accuracy and ROC-AUC for axes, speed, and all data), 
feature type (1. use feature importance to compare which features are more important, 2. compare accuracy and ROC-AUC for position-only versus pos_vel_acc),
label type (1. compare accuracy and ROC-AUC for each of the 3 semi-supervised labels regardless of condition) significantly influenced prediction accuracy. 

(new ***) Time needed to respond to predict SD

(new ***) Ability to generate a realistic unsupervised label for predicting SD

Finally, no significant relationship between physical disorientation and motion detection was found, indicating that two-sample before and after SSQ questionnaire-based methods are insufficient to uncover correlations with perceptual disorientation; a more frequent physical disorientation measure is needed.


